Um, you know, you have, you know, you know, Northern lights at night, if you're,
if you're locking, um, massive moose and, and caribou,
like watching caribou migrate and grizzly bears eating blueberries. And,
you know, I've been, I spent so much time with wolves up in these areas and,
and, and really engaging with the wolves and stuff. And just,
it's just always fed these experiences to me.
And that's what really started to mean.
That's what really mattered the most to me was being in these areas,
taking a deep breath, being super present,
being super aware and seeing all of these different things that were filling
my soul. Right.
True soul food while I was hunting a moose or while I was hunting a caribou and
then maybe being successful on a sort of caribou and skinning it
out and, and feeling the weight on my back.
Cause I'm getting it back to camp and the Northern lights are overhead or the,
if they're not out, the stars are out and I'm hearing wolves hauling. And I,
you know, I, I, I, uh,
I lived with a pack of wolves one summer in Alaska when I was up there doing
research. And so like all of these, I lived with a pack of wolves.
<affirmative> <affirmative>, how'd you do that? Um, I was, uh, I,
I was doing research for the us fish and wildlife service and, uh,
I ran a research camp, a, a genetics camp for the,
from June through September, may through September,
whatever I did it five years in row. And one year, uh,
pack of wolves moved into my research camp. Whoa. And, um, oh,
it was whoa. I mean,
whoa <laugh> I went fly fishing one night and I was standing on the bank of a
river casting and it was an eerie little river that I was on it pretty quiet,
but it had a good flow. And we were,
I was waiting for salmon to come up and I was fly fishing for Grailing. And, uh,
it just kind of had this eerie feeling.
I was by my myself and I just had this eerie feeling that I was being watched.
And, and I happened to look behind me and there's a big Alder thicket, right?
These, these,
these bushes that are probably 10 to 12 feet high have green leaves on 'em and
these twisted gnarly almost like a, you know, booraley type tree,
like gnarly branches. And I was, I was just staring in, in,
in the alders and there's grizzly bears where I was. So I was just trying,
I mind my, and I'm, you know,
I'm walking on Wolf and grizzly bear tracks as I'm fishing.
So I was just staring back in the ERs and, um, it was, it was like a movie.
So my, my eyes were starting to truncate down on the leaves.
And then all of a sudden it came to all this little opening.
I could see a Wolf's face staring at me through the alders and,
and she was probably 10 yards away, something like that. Whoa.
And so I saw her and when I looked at her,
she was just staring at me and I just looked back at her and I, and I just said,
Hey, you know, I just said, Hey. I said, Hey mom, what's going on?
And I just kept fishing.
Cause I wanted her to know that I knew and I turned my back on her and I kept
fishing. Well, lo and behold,
she comes out on the sandbar with me and she starts walking down behind me.
And it was funny cuz if I didn't make eye contact, she was totally chill.
But if I made eye contact, she would snarl at me.
She'd raise her lips up and give a little deep seated girl.
And so she was standing now she's probably three feet behind me. What? Yeah.
And so she's, she's right there. She's literally right there.
And so I'm just like, Hey mom, what's going on? Just cast my flyer on. And,
and like when I'm not looking at her, she's kind of trying to check me out.
She's doing the whole nose extension, getting a whiff. So she moves off.
She moves off down the three feet. She moves off, down that.
Do you have a gun on you? I did have a 12 gauge at that time.
I'd had a 12 gauge slug gun. Um, but I rarely took that thing with me. But um,
I got in trouble actually from one of my bosses.
Cause one of the other biologists told my boss, like never,
he never carries the gun and we're supposed to carry a gun everywhere we go.
So I'm just like, whatever. But um, so she left and um, would you worry.
She was gonna attack you? No, not at how all did she get those? So close.
That seems.
Weird. I don't know. Yeah. She was just checking me out.
She was just checking me out. That's that's that's,
that's how I was reading into it. Anyway. So you think just by.
The way you were talking to her that she realized that you weren't even
interested in being a threat and she was confident that she could get the away.
From you. That's a good question. Yeah. That's a good question. Eat. Yeah.
That's this that's 1, 2, 3.
Yeah, maybe even two and a half feet. Like she's.
Right behind, behind that. Like.
You could touch her. Oh, it gets much better. It gets much better.
I ended up spending a whole summer with her and all the other, um,
animals in the, in the pack.
So the next day I hear her Hoel down the river,
so I'm just mess around. So I ho back to her, she hos back to me instantly.
I hol back to her all of a sudden, I see her.
She's now standing exactly where I was standing the night before.
This's all true story. She's sitting on her butt sitting upright.
Like you would see a German shepherd sitting staring at me.
So I give her just a little coy little, oh,
she lays down.
She maintains eye contact with me and then she's just sitting there staring at
me and then she sits up again. And I hol again, just a, a little one.
She lays down again. She's just maintaining eye, eye contact.
Then she leaves that night. So the area that Tundra that I was on,
um, is great impacted by even human foot traffic.
So you have to be really careful where you step cuz you know,
your footprint will be there for a long time.
So we'd walk on these little planks that we made out of two by fours that would
sit up on logs that were, you know, that we' put placed in and put in place.
And I had tent rice slepted and I had a genetics tent where I did all my, uh,
stuff. And then I had a cook tent, things like that. And so,
but right in front of my tent,
I had this little platform where I would get dressed in the morning cuz I would,
I would literally live for five and a half months and a little two and a half
person pop tent.
And so I'd get out in the morning and get dressed on this little piece of wood
and then I'd walk to breakfast or whatever,
or to the river in the middle of the night,
the alpha mail was sitting on my little platform and he,
how old right outside my tent. So,
and I sat up and I grabbed my gun and I was just sitting there and he woke me up
from a dead sleep and I was just sitting there panting with my gun.
I was looking all around and I didn't know what it was.
And then I heard something and I kind of peeked out and I saw that it was this
big male. I was like, ah, okay. It's just not just a Wolf, but like,
you know, I'm, he's not gonna bother me at all.
So I hung my gun back up and I just,
or set my gun back down and I just laid back down.
But th those two instances just started each day. Um,
the next day I, I come out and I'm walking to the genetics tent and I see him,
he's 20 yards away and he's paralleling me on this plank and I go into the
cook tent and then I'm kind of like peeking out the little corners, you know,
like I want to, I, cause I, I don't know what they're doing.
I don't wanna walk out and get attacked or, and I, I don't think that's,
they have no body language of hunting whatsoever. And,
and so what is their body language of curiosity? Like curiosity. Yeah. And,
um, I hate to, I hate to, um, anthropomorphies yeah, but it was just like,
it was just like that movie never cry Wolf.
That's exactly how the wolves were engaging movie. What was that movie? Uh,
just about a researcher, uh,
book by Farley Malet of a researcher that went up to, um,
the Canadian government had,
they were thinking that wolves were death estimating these caribou herds.
And so they sent this biologist up there to research the wolves,
to see how many caribou they were killing. And, um,
basically what the bologists found out was that the wolves weren't killing any
caribou, zero caribou,
they were killing red back bowls and they were fishing and they were doing other
ways. They were eating small animals,
which is basically a very large par what wolves do they eat?
Very small animal S and occasionally kill caribou, occasionally kill moose,
things like that in certain areas. They're, um,
they can be really hardcore predators in other areas that eat a lot of mice.
And so, um, but that's how these wolves were engaging with the,
the actor in this movie. And, you know, they were kind of inquisitive.
They were coming around and, and so these, these wolves,
they were just always press and like even I would go hiking just to get some
exercise and literally three or four of them would go with me and they'd hang
back like 50, 60 yards behind me, but I I'd hike for like 10 miles. And they,
and they'd do the whole thing with me and return back to camp with me.
And then it started to really grow. Um,
cause we have this research gear that's in the river so that we can count
specate and sampled a salmon as they swim through to go spawn.
But after the salmon spawn, they all die. Right.
And so they would spawn die and they'd come back and they'd wash up on my gear.
And so I'd have all these, that's why the wolves were there.
They wanted to eat the dead fish that were coming back down.
And so as I started toss fish off on the banks of the river,
usually I would just toss 'em back river, but I toss 'em on the banks,
the fresher fish. And, uh, the wolves started eating them.
And then our relationship just kept growing and growing and growing and growing.
And, and then up spending like three and a half months with them.
Did you think while you were doing this,
that this is probably how human beings and wolves yes.
Developed this relationship a hundred percent, a hundred percent a percent.
And I actually, I feel bad saying this and I hope I don't offend anybody,
but I was working with two Innuit guys, two Eskimo guys,
and they wanted to shoot all these wolves
and I kinda lied to 'em and I just said, man, like,
have you ever seen wolves behave like this? And they said, no. And I said, well,
you know, some of your guys' beliefs, you know,
fall that your ancestors move on into the animal kingdom. Right.
And they're like, yeah. And I said, well,
is there a chance that some of these wolves could be some of your ancestors,
you know? And I know that's not true, at least I think I know that's not true,
but they're like, yeah. Yeah.
So I just was trying to convince these guys cause they wanna of blast these
things.
And so I just convinced him not to shoot the wolves and I feel like an singing
all lot. Why do you feel like an saying that? I don't know.
I just didn't want them to shoot the wolves. So I just kind of,
it's probably a good way to rationalize it. I, I steered them down a path of,
of where their minds may have gone anyway. Yeah. Yeah. And so, but I,
I spent time with those wolves and I've had, um, you know,
and the idea of management, like, uh, when we were in, in,
in the short that Jamie was just playing who we are that we played,
you can see some wolves in there.
And a few years ago I got surrounded by a pack of wolves in the Arctic with the
crew and it filmed really beautifully. And it was,
and it was one of the most remarkable engagements I've ever had in the
wilderness. Um, and they were definitely,
their body language was definitely looking at us as though,
are we food? Right? So this, that was one of 'em,
but we had like six or seven wolves come in behind us.
So this Wolf would be in front of us two or three, others would be behind us,
but you can see, they're not attacking us. They're not even hunting us,
but you can just see, like, they're wondering, you know, it's there,
is there a play here? Right? Right. Is there, is there a play here? And, and um,
and I, and I, and I mean, this, I'm not being a tough guy.
There wasn't an ounce that I didn't have a,
not a fiber of my body was afraid at any point. And there's probably six,
seven wolves around us within 10 yards all, and they're communicating,
they're doing this little like, eh,
so they're talking to each other and then they just moved off.
And it turns out that the, the moose that I was stalking,
I think they were stalking to. Cause there was a big bull that was bedted.
And if they weren't stalking him, um,
cause I think they would've had their hands full with him,
but if they weren't stalking him,
then they were just moving in that general direction in a, they were for sure.
Or hunting and I've just, I've always had a, you know,
tremendous respect for them. And I've always spent,
I I've just they've I've always had time with them.
I've always had time with them. I've always been,
I've had Wolf tags in my pocket before, you know, this kind of falls under the,
the same idea of conservation. Like these wolves right here. Right.
I had a Wolf tag in my pocket, had my bow.
I could have arrowed any of these wolves, easily multiples of them probably. Um,
but I didn't want to kill a Wolf here because I, you know,
they know when another Wolf is gone. Right. The thepac knows. And so that,
that weighs on me a little bit. That's me. It's also why, right? Like why kill?
'em like, what is there? Are there too many of them? Well,
which is a real issue. See, that was the thing for me is like, I didn't have,
I didn't do my homework for this area. So I was just like,
I don't know if there's a lot of wolves. I don't know. There's little wolves.
I'm not gonna kill a Wolf. I have no interest in killing Wolf.
I get a Wolf tag with my stuff. Ranun was telling me that there's, uh, one.
Of the explorers that traveled the west during Lewis and Clark days,
his favorite meal was Wolf. Hmm. And that Wolf was, uh,
literally his favorite thing to eat.
I've never eaten it. Yeah. I wouldve.
A real hard time. I just couldn't they're too much like dogs.
They they're,
I think there's some sort of a genetic memory that we have of our relationship
with wolves. Mm-hmm <affirmative> and they've, I mean,
they've become dogs and they've become our, you know,
our companions and they they've become a part of our community, you.
Know? Yeah. It just wasn't um, you know, it wasn't for me.
And when the pilot picked me up, he asked me that I'd seen any wolves.
And I said, yeah, we saw a lot of wolve wolves. And he's like, oh, they're now,
you know, he's not, I'm not telling you he is running surveys here,
but he's like, yeah, there's a lot of wolves here.
There's a lot of predation on, on moose here. So we're trying to,
we're trying to really cut the wolves down here, but, and I saw a lot of wolves,
but I also saw a ton of moose and I saw a ton of cows and I saw a, uh,
lots of calves and lots of big bulls.
So everything seemed to be functioning in that area. And I also saw a ton of,
um, red backvols right. They look like mice with little short tails.
And I know where there's a lot of red backvols I know the wolves do extremely
well eating them.
And so you see these little tunnels mm-hmm <affirmative> right.
And the Tundra and stuff. And um,
I think wolves eat a lot smaller of prey than people think on average Ridge.
Right. We see sensational things of small dogs or, or wolves.
And we filmed, I dtunno,
if did you see the Dingo hunt that we filmed in Australia? No. Oh, oh my God.
You guys wanted a Dingo hunting. Nope. We were hunting Buffalo. And um,
while we were hunting,
Buffalo dingos just exploded from the Bush and the dingos were pack hunting.
The asiaic water buffalos. Whoa.
Nobody's ever seen it before nobody's ever filmed it.
Before we had the Dingo Institute call us immediately from Australia. We had,
um, how big's a Dingo small, tiny dude. So we filmed all this in Australia.
That's literally never been filmed before to our knowledge. Uh,
everyone that we talked to that is Dingo researchers.
They wanna know exactly where this was.
Cause he'd never seen his behavior and see this behavior right here.
That was him actually coming in to hunt us.
But you can see the whole crew sat down. Everybody was totally committed.
They're trying to kill that calf right there. And still that calf is monstrous,
right? So there's four or five, six of 'em there. And then they chased.
They stampied the whole herd directly. Right. Us.
That's what you're seeing right here.
And that the herd actually comes to like 15 feet before they split around us.
We're all sitting on our butts and then the dingos actually turn their attention
to us. And they come in around us.
You can see us instantly looking at us as a, we a meal, but like wolves,
like grizzly bears, like black bears very quickly. They look at you and they go,
yeah, this is not gonna work out for me. Weird. Yeah.
They don't wanna die. You know what I mean? So like, yeah,
nobody had ever seen this, but they.
Don't wanna die. Why the are they going after water bottle? I don't know, dude.
Those things are, Giant's.
Terrible idea. But obviously they're, I don'tunno, if this group has.
Done this before, well, they must have right. They must have been successful on,
on a calf. Yeah. You know,
and the idea is that they're gonna chase 'em and wear 'em out and that one of
the calves gonna be separated and they're gonna take it down. Yeah.
But they're like 35 pounds. That's so crazy. Yeah.
They're such a small animal and these calves,
even the calves are probably like a hundred pounds. You right. You see how it,
um, bigger, uh, bigger. Yeah. Maybe even 200.
That guy looks Australian as the other guy. Yeah. He's barefoot and everything.
Hey Mike. Yeah. He's I know. Yeah. Look at my hat. <laugh> so yeah, it's.